# Housing-Project

### Introduction:
	On January 30, 2020, the World Health Organization declared a Public Health Emergency of International Concern marking the official beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic. The pandemic necessitated the closure of businesses and work-from-home policies in an attempt to slow the spread of the virus, and thus resulted in a deep economic downturn. Prior to the onset of the pandemic, the federal funds rate was 2.16%, the highest that it had been in 10 years. In response to the pandemic, the US Federal Reserve drastically cut the fed funds rate to support the US economy, to its lowest point of 0.25%. As restrictions surrounding the pandemic loosened, the Federal Reserve was faced with the rising costs of consumer goods, or inflation, see Combined CPI Graph.png. To combat inflation, the Fed has aggressively raised the interest rate to the highest since before the 2008 Recession. The federal funds rate currently sits at its peak of 5.5% where it has been since July 2023, see fed_funds_rate.png for Funds Rate activity.
	Our group wanted to understand how these economic shifts affected the housing market and house buying activities of Americans. The questions we wanted to answer were the following: How has the housing market changed since 2019 in terms of pricing and purchases? And what effect has Federal intervention (i.e., changing of interest rates) had on these changes?  Who and where are people purchasing homes? To answer these questions, we compared the Federal Funds Rates, CPI, and mortgage rates to median home prices, quantity of homes sold, and quantity of houses purchased by investors. We examined the 5-year time period between January 2019 to present, June 2024.
	To get a more granular understanding of economic activity in the United States, we choose four cities to look at specifically. These cities were chosen from the results of a study performed by the Milken Institute on the “Best Performing Cities” of 2024. This study ranked cities in the United States on three main categories: Labor Market Performance, Access to Economic Opportunities, and High-Tech impact. Cities were categorized as either Large or Small cities, and cities were ranked within each category. The Large cities represent the 200 most populous cities in the US per the 2022 US Census; Small cities are the remaining cities which are less populous than the Large. We chose to examine the highest rated Large and Small cities, and the lowest ranked Large and Small cities, respectively: Austin, TX; Idaho Falls, ID; Pine Bluff, AR; and Shreveport, LA. 

### How has the housing market changed? What is the relationship to Fed intervention?:
	Since 2019, per data obtained from Redfin, the median sales prices of houses have been on a steady increase on the national level and in high-performing cities (Austin, TX and Idaho Falls, ID), see med_home_price.png. However, prices in the cities which were determined to be the least well-performing remained relatively stable. Unsurprisingly, as prices increased, the quantity of homes sold has decreased, see national_home_sales_qty.png for homes sold nationally. There are sharp increases in home buying in 2020 and 2021 which correlates to the trough in interest rates. On an individual city level, Austin, TX sales activity very closely reflects the national sales, whereas Idaho Falls, ID and Pine Bluff, AR activity remained relatively steady as well. Shreveport, LA experienced an increase of purchasing activity in 2021, with a gradual taper off in the following years. See city_home_sales_qty.png for individual city sales data.

### Who is buying?:
Consumer price index (CPI) is a weighted average of consumer goods and services purchased by households. The CPI is a direct measurement of inflation. As the cost of living for the average American household has increased, separate from housing costs, there has been a shift in who is purchasing homes and to what end. On the whole, the number of houses purchased began to decrease in 2022 with the rise in inflation. However, as home purchasing decreased, investor purchases remained relatively high, compared to the years preceding the rise in inflation, see Mortgage Rate vs Investor Market Share.png. This category is defined as houses purchased by entities and not strictly for personal use (e.g., purchases by management companies for housing space to rent out). As there was a peak of home buying, we also saw a peak in investor purchases as more than 20 percent of those homes in 2021 were bought by investors. Additionally, purchasing seems to be concentrated in large, well-performing cities, as demonstrated by the larger factor of activity occurring in Austin, TX compared to the other cities. What seems fascinating is that despite there being a significant drop in the homes being purchased by investors, they are still buying more than 18 percent of total homes. We can conclude that for better or worse, there was a big impact on investor purchases due to the economic climate post-COVID.
